---
layout: post
title: "Algorithmic Complexity & Matrix Properties"
gui_folder: "Upsolving"
gui_subfolder: "ICPC"
---

[ACM HK 2026](https://qoj.ac/contest/3869)

The intended difficulty order is quite random. I think this contest has an extremely flat difficulty curve, but anyways.

---

## A. Apple and Cinnamon

If you suppose that this is a div 2A, then there is only one reasonable thing to guess.  

---

## B. Don't Look Back in Anger

Firstly, note that if $k$ is small, then we can just do a brute force in $\mathcal O(k^2 n \log n)$.

Otherwise, if $k$ is not small, then $n$ is small. We maintain a $n \times n$ array $A$, meaning when we are iterating $r$, $A[i][j]$ stores the number of indices $l \in [1,r]$ such that in the permutation $A_l \circ A_{l+1} \circ \ldots A_r$, there is an inversion pair between the values $i$ and $j$. We can thus compute the answer in $\mathcal O(kn^2)$.

We $k \le 100$ we use the first solution, otherwise we use the second solution. This passes comfortably.

---

## C. Game: Adversarial Distance Oracle

Suppose we fixed node $u$ to be our first query node in our optimal strategy. Root the tree at $u$.

We need to be able to distinguish between nodes of the same depth. Whenever we query at some node $v$, then we can distinguish nodes whose LCA with $v$ are different.

Let $dp[i][j]$ denote the minimum number of queries needed if you know that the secret node must be exactly one of the nodes in the subtree of $i$ and is distance $j$ away from $i$ (and nothing else). Obviously, this is only dependent on and can be calculated based on $dp[u][j-1]$ where $u$ are all the children of node $i$. If we sort these $dp[u][j-1]$ values in nonincreasing order $a_1 \ge a_2 \ge \cdots$, then we evidently have $$dp[i][j] = \max_k (a_k + k - 1)$$

This can be maintained in $\mathcal O(n^2 \log n)$ time easily. As we don't actually know the root $u$, we can simply try all of them and maintain by using a reroot DP. Note that we can afford $\mathcal O(n \log n)$ per change root operation, which can be done easily.

---

## D. Game: Coin Flip

A bit difficult to describe; do later.

--

## E. Game: Cursor Minimum

I dislike this, but anyways.

Just do the easiest sensible thing: random shuffle, and if it is smaller than the previous, we query it against the global minimum so far.

Somewhat counter-intuitively, the expected value is actually *not* $1.5n$ and sufficient to pass. Why?

Our configuration is something of the form $a_0 < a_1 < a_2 < \cdots < a_{k-1} > a_k$ which we denote as a "cycle". What is the expected value length (the value of $k$) of a random cycle? It is actually
$$\sum_k k \cdot \frac{k-1}{k!} = \sum \frac{k-1}{(k-1)!} = e$$

In other words, the expected number of queries this way is actually $(1+e^{-1})n$ which is obviously enough.

--

## F. Game: Pattern Chase

Trivial.

--

## I. The Space between Two Worlds

Fix some value $u$. When can it be the second smallest in a segment?

Find the (up to) $2 \times 2$ closest indices to it that have values smaller than $u$, and you can establish that the valid ranges forms (up to) two ``rectangles'', if we list out the values of second smallest in a grid, with columns being $l$, rows being $r$ (or swap them, it doesn't matter).

So this is just a rectangle assign, rectangle get sum. Since we can do stuff offline, we iterate in increasing order of event time and maintain everything with a size $3$ vector and lazy tags being size $3 \times 3$ matrices.